Thank you,
and thank you for coming this morning.
We're on the fourth day of WWDC.
I imagine a lot of you are beginning
to hit information overload.
I hope you still have a lot of
energy because we have a lot
to present in this session.
Compilers are such an essential
part of development tools.
We're all affected by their performance.
We have a lot of things
to say about that.
We'd be interested to know how
many people in the audience have
downloaded the Darwin source set.
Just raise your hands.
About half, two-thirds.
Okay.
How many people actually contribute
to the Darwin repositories?
A lot fewer.
Okay?
With no further ado,
I'd like to introduce John Graziao,
the manager of the compiler team.
So today we're going to be talking
about Mac OS X compiler technologies
and I just wanted to say a
little bit about what those are.
On my team,
we handle the compiler which is GCC,
the assembler, the linker,
the dynamic loader which is responsible
for starting up your application,
and a lot of utilities like Strip, NM,
O'Tool, and a few others.
The point that we want to make throughout
this talk is that while all of these
are usable as command line tools,
the recommended way that we
want for people to use GCC is
through Project Builder.
We've got a lot of nice things in
Project Builder to integrate with it.
So we're not going to cover
all of these things today,
but what we will talk
about is how to use GCC,
give you a little overview
of the architecture,
touch a little bit on dynamic
linking and pre-binding.
and also talk about some
of the upcoming features.
Okay,
there's two slides on upcoming features,
so don't get too excited.
So the GNU C Compiler.
This is the main compiler for Mac OS X,
and for those of you that
are curious looking for it,
it's basically User Bin CC for
Unix heads in the audience.
It's free software by the
Free Software Foundation.
If you're curious about that,
you can go to GNU.org on the
web and look around there.
It supports ANSI C, C++, and Objective C.
It's got a very robust
C++ implementation,
very robust C++ front end.
It's got many years of work and testing,
compiles for tons and tons of platforms.
It's basically the reference
compiler for many developers.
It's used in education
all over the place.
And the most important thing
is it compiles all of Mac OS X.
Every piece of source code that
runs on Mac OS X is compiled.
goes through GCC.
So a little overview of GCC for those
of you that aren't familiar with it.
It is a command line tool.
And it basically takes C files and
puts out .o files or object files
which we then send to the linker.
But behind the scenes what's
actually going on is GCC is
a driver that first invokes
There we go.
It's the only graphic I have today.
I want it to work.
It first invokes a preprocessor which
outputs preprocessed source code.
That then is fed into the compiler,
which outputs assembler code.
It then invokes the link, the assembler,
which outputs object code.
And finally that goes to the linker,
which binds everything together and
creates your application or your
library or whatever you're making.
All this happens behind the scenes,
but the important thing to keep in mind
is that there are a lot of switches,
if you look at the documentation,
that can be sent to any portion of
these sub-processes to control a lot
of what goes on during this process.
So what we've done at Apple is
we've taken GCC and we've
extended it in a few ways.
We've added Project Builder Integration.
We've added Objective-C.
This has been added for a while,
but now I'd like to-- I'm happy to say
that we are the owners of Objective-C for
the Free Software Foundation.
We're the maintainers.
We support our frameworks.
We support our version
of pre-compiled headers.
We have support in for
the Velocity Engine,
which most of the compiler people
in the audience know as AltaVec.
And of course we support
our Maco object file format.
There's a few differences that
you have to keep in mind for GCC.
The first one is that we have
some stricter ANSI C++ compliance.
So if you're used to
compiling on Mac OS 9,
you may find out that you get a few more
warnings and maybe a few more errors
compiling your source code on Mac OS X.
Mostly in the area of C++ syntax
and especially type checking.
Another thing to keep in mind that will
bite a few people rarely is that our
static initializers will execute possibly
in a different order from Mac OS 9.
Because of the way that we link,
because of the fact that
we have pre-binding,
which I'll talk about a little bit later,
if you have static initializers which
have implicit reliance on one another,
it's not explicit.
If you have a dependency
graph that we can follow,
we get that right.
But if you have implicit dependencies
through global variables or something,
you may find out that the behavior
will be a little different when
you build and run on Mac OS X,
so that's something to be careful about.
So, since public beta,
we've added a few things and
done a lot of work on GCC.
The first thing is we're
fully based now on GCC 295.2.
We used to be running, I think,
the driver and the preprocessor from 272,
and now we're running everything
in the 2952 code base.
We've also added a lot
of C++ improvements,
coalesce symbols,
zero overhead exceptions,
and we've made precomps usable from C++,
which has a dramatic effect
on compile time for C++.
The first thing we added
is coalesced symbols.
What this does is removes multiple
copies of functions that has been
created through inlining and templates.
What we've seen is the finder binary
went down about 300K from 2MB to 1.7MB.
And we've seen similar
reductions in other C++ programs,
especially PowerPlant programs.
And this is giving us an overall
reduction in the system memory footprint.
And you're going to hear
this theme returned to over
and over through this talk.
The most important thing you can
do to optimize your application on
Mac OS X to make it run really fast is
to reduce the system memory footprint,
reduce the working set in memory,
because you can optimize the
CPU usage as much as you want,
but as soon as your app starts
paging in and out through
the virtual memory system,
you're going to get slower.
So another thing we've done along this
route is added zero overhead exceptions.
Before, what we do is put a set jump in,
a system call, when you have a try block.
Now we've removed that.
So try blocks are basically free,
as free as any code that's
not inside of a try block.
The common case is very fast,
so we've seen about 2x improvement
in some real world apps.
For leaf functions, we've actually seen
about a 20x improvement,
if it's just a bare leaf function
that has a try block in it.
We've also seen size reduction.
We knocked the finder size down
by an additional 400k when we
added zero overhead exceptions.
The big thing to keep in mind, though,
is for throws, this will add a memory
penalty and a speed penalty,
especially for the first time you throw,
because we do page in a lot of code
to unwind the stack at that point.
So our basic policy is we
treat exceptions as exceptional
conditions for error messages.
If you have something
that's in your main line,
a processing that uses C++ exceptions,
you may see a slight performance
lose with zero overhead exceptions.
But the vast majority of people
are going to see a big win.
What we've also added are
precompiled headers usable from C++.
What we've seen in here is
compile times improve as much
as 5x for Carbon applications.
So the way that we did this is
precomps can be accessed from C++ now.
We have an extra C++ aware precompiled
header in all of our umbrella frameworks.
But they cannot contain C++ syntax
due to a limitation on the way
that we do precompiled headers.
And the other thing is that macros
and compiler flags have to match
as with most precompiled headers.
If you change a macro setting,
the precompiled header will
not be able to be used.
We'll have to go back to
the standard text header.
So I'd like to talk a little bit
about how we use GCC on Mac OS X.
So,
and some of the things I'm going to cover
are just Project Builder Integration,
how you can use and take
advantage of precompiled headers,
optimization, and I'll touch a little
bit on Altevec as well.
So GCC and Project Builder
have been designed for a while
to work very well together.
Project Builder is our preferred
way to use GCC on Mac OS X.
It's got a lot of nice
integration for you.
It handles most of the command
line switches with GUIs,
most of the most common
command line switches,
and there's also ways to access some
of the uncommon command line switches
directly from Project Builder.
It has integrated error messages
so that when GCC has an error,
a syntax error,
it comes up in Project Builder.
And those of you who have been
at the Project Builder session,
how many of you have been at
the Project Builder session?
So we didn't call that out this year just
because it's been around for a while now.
But basically GCC actually sends
a message up to Project Builder
and Project Builder will display
the error message and jump
to the line in source code.
GCC also provides source code indexing
information to Project Builder.
So for any cross-reference information
that you need doing global searches
or running the new class browser
that we have in Project Builder,
all of that comes off of information
that the compiler supplies.
Let's talk a little bit
about the Precompiler.
The Precompiler creates a file of
preprocessed and tokenized headers.
So it basically takes the group
of headers that we have for say
Carbon or Cocoa and it tokenizes
them and puts them all into one
big file that we can then access.
The big thing for us is that
it not only does this which
reduces some of our I/O costs and
reduces some of our lexing costs,
but it also at compile time
selectively unparses the
declarations based on what's used.
Some of our measurements when
we're working on compile time,
we see that 174,000 lines of
declarations get brought in from Carbon.
So, not everyone uses, obviously,
even a small fraction of that.
So, the big win in the precompiler is
it can selectively pull in those
declarations that you're using.
What this does is it reduces the size
of that pre-processed file that we
generate and reduces the overall memory
footprint of the compiler itself so it
doesn't have to push out the IDE to make
room for the parsing that it has to do.
So when we're using precompiled headers,
we already supply you with precompiled
headers for the frameworks that we
ship for the major umbrella frameworks.
So Carbon and Cocoa already
have their precompiled headers.
If anybody's gone nosing
around inside of the framework,
you'll see a .p file living in there,
and now a .pp file,
which is the C++ version of
those precompiled headers.
Project Builder also supports creating
your own set of precompiled headers.
You can actually have more
than one precompiled header.
In a minute I'll bring Devang
up to show how we do that.
And the preprocessor will automatically
find these precompiled headers,
so you don't have to worry about
telling Project Builder or telling the
preprocessor where these headers are.
We'll look for them if they're
in the same spot as the .h
that it was created from.
So again, there are some limitations
to precompiled headers.
Macro settings, compiler settings,
and the timestamps that they
were built on have to match.
If there's a change in them,
we have a fallback position where we
go to using the text-based header,
which is going to slow
down your compile times.
They can be included from C++ files,
but they cannot contain C++ syntax.
So I'd like to bring up Devang Patel
and we're going to go through how
you create your own pre-compiled
header with Project Builder.
So can we have demo two up
on both of the screens here?
So what we have is just the
example project appearance sample,
and we brought it up in Project Builder.
And the first thing we've done is
we've pre-cooked a small header.
And if those of you can read this,
what Devang's gone in and done is
set a macro to be debug level two.
What this is going to do is basically
break the relationship between this
project and the pre-compiled header
that we ship with the Carbon Framework.
So the compiler will fall back on
using the text-based header and bring
in all 174,000 lines of declarations.
So let's see what that looks like.
We've basically just tweaked one file
And let's go ahead and build that.
So we're going ahead and building that,
and you're seeing as this happens that
we get a lot of warnings saying that
we can't use the pre-compiled header.
And there we're done.
And that was one file,
just to compile all
of those declarations.
So, what to look for if you're seeing
slow compile times with C++ is
definitely look for those warnings.
Make sure that you're using
the precompiled header.
Now what we're going to do is go to
the build settings for this target and
actually make our own precompiled header.
Now the first thing that's done,
that's a new feature in Project Builder,
is that you can actually add an
implicitly included header so that
every header comes into the project,
so that every source file in
the project uses this header.
Some people are softly clapping.
This is a good thing.
The other thing that we have is we've
got a switch that you can just click
and you can precompile this header.
You can obviously add as many of
these as you want to this table
and you can precompile all of them.
So what Devang has done is
he's actually clicked that
he's going to precompile this.
And what we'll do is go
back and click Build again.
And you'll see that in addition
to doing some of the prep work,
what it's saying now is it's
running precompile header.
And it's actually creating the two
precomps that we'll use in this project.
So that's done.
So now let's go back and
run the same build again.
So Devang's just going to
tweak this a little bit.
And Command S.
And there we go.
So what we're seeing is on average about
5x improvement in your compile times
when you're using a precompiled header.
And this is, you know,
the sort of preferred way that a lot
of IDEs get their compile times up
is by building precompiled headers.
And the big thing for
you is getting out the,
you know,
the huge amount of declarations we
have in Carbon and Cocoa and being able
to get those in a tokenized fashion.
You can selectively use them and speed
up your compile time significantly.
Now the other thing that
Devang is highlighting,
because we didn't have a slide on this,
is for those of you that are interested,
there's a command line tool called PDUMP.
If you're not able to use your
precompiled header for some reason,
you can't figure it out,
or if you just want to poke around inside
of the precomp and see what's in there,
you can use PDUMP.
You can use PDUMP.
And PDUMP-help, dash dash help,
which will give you a lot of information
on what you can pull out of there.
So it might be an interesting
exercise just to poke around inside
the precomp and see what's in there
and how this stuff is recorded.
So that's it for the demo.
Thanks Devang.
Let's talk about optimization.
So the two things I want to talk
about here are controlling the
compiler optimization levels
and actually what they do.
So I'll warn you,
this will descend a little
bit into compiler geekery,
but not much.
So the first one is Optimization Level 0.
It's basically the default for GCC.
If you pass no optimization
flag on the command line,
you get no optimization.
You can also pass "-o 0." The reason they
have that is it allows you to override
a previously passed optimization flag.
It does no optimization.
So what you get is
slower and bigger code,
but code that you can
easily follow in the debugger.
It also gives you the
fastest turnaround time,
but compared to something like
using a precompiled header versus
not using a precompiled header,
it's basically in the noise.
And it's the default setting for
Project Builder deployment builds,
or Project Builder development builds.
So when you set the build
style in Project Builder to
be the development build,
what you get is unoptimized code.
So Optimization Level 1,
basically -01 on the command line,
turns on a bunch of basic optimizations.
It turns on register allocation,
it turns on data flow analysis,
dead code elimination,
some jump optimizations,
and also peephole optimization.
I won't get into, for those of you that
don't know what that is,
don't worry about it.
It basically turns on some sort of basic
level of statement level optimization.
The key point here is that
it results in much smaller
and faster code than level 0.
So, for those of you that can
read the bottom line here,
it says binary sizes can reduce as
much as 50%. We did some initial
testing on the Finder front
end and a couple other things.
We built them unoptimized.
We built them with -01.
And the size of the binary went
down by 50%, and you should
expect that your code execution,
just raw CPU,
throughput will go up by about a
factor of two between unoptimized
code and optimizing it at -01.
For Optimization Level 2,
this provides sort of
function level optimizations.
It brings in common
sub-expression elimination,
loop optimization, strength reduction,
and it turns on the
instruction scheduler.
It produces faster,
though not necessarily smaller,
code than -01.
So we'll see some benchmarks that
rely on these optimizations going
up by about 10 to 15 percent.
But the code will not
get that much smaller.
And in fact, in some cases,
if you have a lot of
loop unrolling going on,
the code actually grows by a little bit.
The other thing is,
because we're doing statement
level optimization at this point,
we're doing things which
will move statements around,
will move variable
settings outside of loops.
What you'll see in the debugger is
that sometimes as you're stepping,
you may not go exactly where you
think the source code is going to go.
You also may have trouble
finding variables that have
been hoisted into registers.
So the other optimization
level that we support inside
of GCC is optimization level 3,
which turns on the inliner.
So this is automatic function inlining,
not just when you say
inline inside of C++.
So in some cases,
this can result in faster code,
but the thing to keep in mind is
it might increase your binary size.
So you may get faster code on a benchmark
or faster code when you test one
particular piece of your application.
But overall,
you may bloat your binary enough
that you start paging a little
more and cancel out the results
of getting this extra inlining.
So profiling is very important.
Measuring this is very important
to see what kind of performance
you're getting if you're using -03,
just to make sure that you're
doing the right thing for
your particular application.
And I'll point you to a session that's
happening in here at 5:00 today on the
performance tools where Robert Bowditch
is going to get up and talk about
some of the tools you can use to
make sure that you're doing the right
thing for your particular application.
talk about some of the tools you
can use to measure your application.
And of course when we're talking
about doing automatic inlining,
debugging will get, again,
a little more difficult
for you when you're tracing
through inside of the debugger.
So,
some recommendations for optimization.
We always use internally no
optimization when we're building,
when we're just doing development builds.
This lets us get access to
all the stuff in the debugger.
There's no statement movement
or anything that confuses us.
It gives us the best turnaround time.
It's generally what we recommend
for external developers as well.
Our build style gives you -0 when you
choose the development build style.
We also recommend for deployment
builds for most people to use -02.
It doesn't have a big effect on
the size of your binary over -01,
but turning on any
optimization is a big win.
Turning on -02 gives you
that extra 10-15%. Again,
it has that trade-off that if you're
using -02 and then trying to debug it,
you may run into a couple
confusing situations.
And again,
-03 when you have CPU critical cases,
when you're trying to get that last
ounce of performance out of it,
but definitely make sure that
you're not loading your binary
to the point where it's not,
it's canceling out the
results results of the change.
So just a little bit on AltaVec in GCC.
The big thing to keep in mind
is that we support all of the
Altevec intrinsics in GCC.
So if you're used to using
Altevec through Code Warrior,
the same thing applies.
You'll be able to use that same
code inside of Project Builder,
inside of GCC.
And again,
it requires though that you pass a
-f Altevec flag to Project Builder,
which we can show you how to do.
If I can bring Devang back up here.
[Transcript missing]
There's sort of a general
table called Build Settings.
And for the compiler flags that
aren't represented inside of the GUI,
you can actually get at
these through this table.
This is sort of an
expert view for people.
But all of these flags
basically correspond,
all of these uppercase
variables on the left-hand side,
correspond to variables that get passed
into our build system and expanded.
Some of the stuff that you're going
to be interested in looking at are
other C flags and other LD flags
and then optimization C flags.
What you can do there is basically set,
here Devang is setting the
-f altavec flag for those of
you that can see the font.
The other thing that's nice if
you're really a gear head is you
can pass in flags that turn on
and off any of the individual
optimization passes that GCC does.
So if you want to turn on loop
unrolling but you don't want
to have strength reduction,
for example,
you can pass in the individual
flags inside of these C flags.
For those of you that are wondering
where are all these things documented,
in the project builder release notes,
there's a build.html file.
And if you go and look at that,
the settings that are listed here
are all documented so you know
what's going to happen when you set
some of these different settings.
Again,
this is just basically an expert view,
but if there are flags that
you want to get at that
aren't represented in the GUI,
this is where you go.
And you should be able to basically,
you know, for people who are used to
using GCC from the command line,
this gives you access to all
the flags that you want to use.
So, thanks, Devang.
So I want to say a couple
things on dynamic linking.
This is something that happens
outside of the compiler.
This happens with our dynamic
linking process called DYLD.
And this is how your app starts up.
Basically, when your app is compiled,
the references are not resolved.
And this is how we actually
use shared libraries.
Basically,
if you compile your app that has dynamic
references into shared libraries,
when your app starts up,
what happens is we first bind
the references to functions
and data at startup time.
The function references allow
us to do lazy initialization.
So in the basic case,
When you start up your application,
the function references are
not resolved until you actually
call through to those functions.
The thing to keep in mind
is that any data references,
if you're referencing global data,
those references have to be resolved
at startup time before you hit main
because we have no way to trap on first
use and go and run any initialization
routines that have to happen.
So if you're accessing data,
some library init routines may have to
be run before main actually starts up.
So the reason we're talking about
this is because I also want to mention
this thing we have called pre-binding.
What pre-binding does is it
actually sets the dynamic link
addresses at static link time.
So if you're running
against a shared library,
the linker will actually go out
and grab those addresses and
set them up at static link time.
This can give you a dramatic improvement
in launch times because you're not
having to search through the symbol
tables of the libraries at all.
And most importantly,
again getting back to the memory theme,
you're not having to page in those
symbol tables to do the search.
The tradeoff is this gives
you no lazy initialization.
All of this stuff has to
be set up at compile time.
So we're just going out through
addresses at that point,
so we can't trap on first use.
So we have to actually initialize
the libraries and the modules
before the app actually hits main.
In a lot of cases, this doesn't give you
a dramatic slowdown.
It's still a big win to do pre-binding,
but that's definitely
something that is a trade-off.
Applications are built by default
prebound in Project Builder.
So this will give you prebinding if
you're building an application that
links against the system libraries,
this will give you a
prebound application.
But the big thing to keep in mind is
that binaries which are prebound have
to be updated when the libraries change.
So, for those of you that have been
poking around the web and seeing
this thing on what is all this
system optimization that's going on,
I just downloaded the developer package
and it's optimizing my system again.
What's basically happening is
it's going through and it's
re-prebinding those binaries.
So it goes through,
it looks for binaries on the system,
and it basically fixes up the addresses
to the libraries as they've been updated.
So, you know, once that's been run,
the libraries are prebound.
The Mac OS X GM shipped prebound,
so running that on a stock
Mac OS X GM system isn't
going to get you anything.
But when libraries are updated,
going through and re-prebinding
this actually is a way that helps
us fix up our binaries so that
they run as fast as possible.
Let's talk a little bit about
upcoming features in the compiler
and in the compiler toolchain.
So the first thing we're
going to talk about is GCC3,
what's coming with that.
We'll talk about a feature in the
linker called two-level namespace,
which most of you who have worked in
the CFM world are already used to.
And of course,
what a lot of you are here to
hear about is Objective-C++,
and then we'll talk about some things
that are coming further down the road.
Soft applause for Objective-C++.
So GCC3 is what we're
currently working on.
We've got it building some of Mac OS X,
but not all of it right away.
What this gives us is an
integrated preprocessor.
It gives us some better C++ support,
better C++ compliance.
It has a lot of code gen improvements,
especially for the PowerPC.
And something to keep in mind for
people as we're rolling this out is
it does give you C++ ABI changes.
So if you're using a shared library
that contains exported C++ calls,
exported C++ classes,
or anything like that,
there will be ABI changes.
You'll have to ship a new binary for
that if you compile it with GCC3.0.
The other thing we've added
is two-level namespace.
Before what we had on Mac OS X on public
beta and on GM is a flat namespace.
So all of your libraries and
all of your applications,
just basically all the symbols
went up into a big pool.
And if there were any name collisions,
you basically lost at that point.
The thing to keep in mind is
that if you're loading bundles,
if you're loading plugins,
we actually have a two-level
namespace implemented for plugins.
So things like QuickTime and other
applications with load plugins
already can take advantage of this.
What we're doing is expanding this
feature to the rest of your binary
the way that it works on Mac OS 9.
So we link now by symbol
name and library name.
What this does is it protects
against name collisions in modules.
So if we add a new API to our libraries
that conflicts with a function
that you call in your application,
it doesn't break your application now.
So as we update libraries moving forward,
it won't mess up the applications
that you already have.
This also speeds dynamic linking
for non-prebound applications
because instead of having to search
the entire set of symbol tables,
we go right to the library
and we look for it there.
The thing to keep in mind for
people who are used to compiling
and the flat namespace coming over
from Mac OS X Server or having
done some other Unix applications,
there is one restriction that
you have to keep in mind.
That if you reference a
symbol now out of a library,
you have to explicitly
include it on the link line.
So in case you're wondering
about compatibility,
Mac OS X GM apps work just
fine on the new system.
So we'll have a two-level
namespace system.
Things that have shipped for
Mac OS X GM will work just fine.
Two-level apps will also
work just fine on GM systems.
So you build your app for two-level
namespace when this is rolled out
and it'll run fine on Mac OS X GM.
And any combination of flat and
two-level libraries will work as well.
So you can have a two-level app
that links against a flat library
that links against another,
you know, our system libraries,
which will be two-level at that point.
And that will all work just fine.
So Kevin Enderby is the engineer
that worked on this and he did a
really good job making sure that
all these corner cases got covered.
He'll be on stage later so you can
ask him some questions about this.
So now what I'd like to do is bring
up Zeb Laski who's the responsible
engineer for Objective C++ and he's
going to walk you through what we've
been doing on Objective C++ and
what some of the details are there.
Welcome Zeb.
Thank you much.
Thank you.
Well, as John mentioned,
I did do most of the work,
so at least for the initial release,
if things break, you can blame me.
So basically what I'd like to do
is just give you a really broad
and really quick overview of what
Objective-C++ is and what it is not.
So the most important
thing to remember—actually,
there are two very important things.
The first one is that it's really just
a combination of C++ and Objective-C,
or perhaps more accurately,
it's a superimposition
of Objective-C on C++,
with C++ sort of being
the senior partner.
And the reason we did
this is very simple.
We would like to allow C++
programmers to utilize the
numerous Objective-C frameworks
that we have on the system,
most notably Cocoa.
In conjunction with this rollout,
we concocted a new file extension, .mm,
which should be used for
Objective-C++ source code.
There's a timer here.
Some of you who are coming over
from the next days might also have
seen that .capm as an extension,
but we hereby declare this to be
no longer politically correct.
The HFS file system is case-preserving
but not case-sensitive.
There are also other issues,
so we strongly encourage
you to move away from .capm.
A few words about the implementation
as it currently exists.
It is a separate compiler,
a separate frontend
that I was working on,
which is separate from the C++
frontend and the other ones.
And now I come to the
second important point,
the first one being the
combination of the two languages.
The second important point is
that an Objective-C++ program,
once you compile and run it,
interacts with two runtimes:
the C++ runtime and the
Objective-C runtime.
Now I'm not sure how much you're
aware of one or the other,
which direction you're coming from,
if you're coming from the C++ world,
then you probably know
more about the first one.
If you're coming from the
Cocoa/Next-Step world,
you probably know more
about the second one.
But the important thing here is that
these two runtimes are separate.
They are different,
they have different semantics,
and at least at present,
they are mutually unaware of one another,
or as I like to say,
mutually oblivious of one another.
Syntactically,
the Objective-C constructs and C++
constructs are also separate in
the sense that you can easily tell
just by looking at a construct
which language it belongs to,
which of course makes life a lot
easier for us in implementing it,
and also for you in terms of
figuring out what is what and
what semantics go with it.
So first off, I'd like to give you
sort of the good news,
the ways in which you can
mix C++ and Objective-C code.
So first of all,
you can declare an instance
of an Objective-C object,
which is really a reference
or a pointer to that object,
like in Java.
You can declare that anywhere
you have a C++ declaration.
So wherever you can
declare a C++ variable,
you can declare these
Objective-C variables.
Secondly, Objective-C classes,
the declarations of
the classes themselves,
may contain within them
C++ classes or C structs.
There are some exceptions to that,
which I will get into later.
Objective-C message sense,
which you see in this square
bracket notation there,
if you haven't seen this before,
this really is a typed expression.
So you can use that anywhere you
have C++ expressions in your code,
and an example is forthcoming.
And finally,
Objective-C++ relies on the C++
type checking semantics for some
of the lower level type checking.
And the reason I bring this up is that
if you're used to Objective-C coding,
it relies on C type checking.
So for instance,
if you have a signed character and you
assign it to an unsigned character in C,
that's usually fine.
The C compiler will not complain.
What you'll find here is that the
C++ part of Objective-C++ will,
you know, raise its head and complain.
In other words,
some code that is valid Objective-C code
might not necessarily be valid
Objective-C++ code because of
the increased C++ strictness.
So here I concocted sort of a two
slide example showing you what an
Objective C++ program looks like.
And for ease of understanding,
I've color coded it so that the
Objective C part of it is in blue
and the C++ part is in yellow.
So you see first off,
we call this "Hello World"
as we always should.
Then we import "coco.h", that's
a typical Objective C thing.
And by the way,
John mentioned before that you can
use precompiled headers with C++ now.
You will also be able to
use it with Objective C++.
So there will be a "coco.pp" on your
system when this whole thing is released,
so this will go very fast.
Then in yellow you see a forward
declaration of a C++ class.
Then we get to a declaration
of an Objective C class,
which we call "println".
We derive it from NSObject,
which is sort of the root
of the "coco" object.
We have a pointer to the C++
class we previously mentioned.
And then we declare prototypes
for two methods in Objective C.
Then here,
this is the second part of the example.
First we flash out the C++ class,
so you have Hello World.
Here we have an ID,
a member variable of type ID,
which is sort of analogous
to Java lang object,
if you've used Java.
It's sort of a generic pointer that
can point to any Objective-C object.
And we define a constructor
and a destructor,
so you can see in the
constructor for the C++ class,
we actually allocate and init the
corresponding Objective-C class,
and that is, by the way,
how you usually create an
Objective-C object with
this alloc init idiom.
And then we sort of, you know, we say hi,
so you call printf,
which is a standard C function,
of course.
Then you have SayHello,
which basically turns around
and invokes a method called
SayHi in the Objective-C class.
And down below, we have an implementation
of the Objective-C class,
which is in blue.
So you can sort of see the notation here.
NSLog is also a standard Cocoa function.
It's actually a C function,
if you really look at it.
So it basically prints
"Hello World" on the screen.
The example is sort of silly,
as all examples are,
but it kind of shows you
how you can mix and match.
So you can see within Objective-C,
we actually use p arrow
SayHi to call the C++ method.
And vice versa, from a C++ class,
you can invoke an Objective-C method.
Okay, and now we get to the sort of the
important part of this talk in
the sense that we'd like to sort
of emphasize why certain things
cannot be done in Objective C++.
And the reason most of these
things cannot be done is what
I mentioned at the outset,
is that the runtimes are separate.
Because they are separate,
they do not know of one another,
and therefore certain
things really cannot happen.
So, you know,
number one obviously you can't
do is mix up class hierarchies.
If you have a, you know,
hierarchy of C++ objects, that's fine.
a hierarchy of Objective C objects,
that's fine too.
You cannot mix them,
because it will just be very confusing
for the compiler and the runtime.
As far as exception handling,
we really encourage you to
use the C++ runtime for this.
The, you know, the try, throw,
catch paradigm.
Objective C does have some set jump,
long jump based.
Exceptions,
which are basically macros that expand.
And we really do not
discourage you from using this,
because C++ just won't know
what's going on when you do this.
And one thing to keep in mind is
that when you use C++ exceptions,
you have to clean up any Objective
C objects that you have lying around.
So here you have a try block where we,
you know,
instantiate an Objective C object.
And then we have a catch
clause which frees it.
And then you re-throw the C++
exception to be possibly caught by
some other handler in an enclosure.
So you can see that you
have a closing scope,
you know, in your stack.
You have to do this, because again,
the C++ runtime will not know
about my obj that it's an Objective
C class or what to do with it.
This is a recurring theme.
C++ classes cannot receive
Objective C messages or vice versa.
This is fairly trivial.
I mean, you cannot,
the functions in C++ that you call an
object and the methods in the Objective
C land are really semantically different.
You cannot treat one as
if it were the other.
The search mechanism is different.
It's, they do not mix.
So, I mean, and the compiler will
diagnose this correctly.
So you shouldn't run
into any problems there.
You cannot statically allocate
new or delete Objective C objects.
And actually the new and delete
keywords should be in yellow,
because that's in C++ construct.
And the reason again is
if you create an object,
you have to initialize
the Objective C object,
which the C++ runtime
wouldn't know how to do.
If you're familiar with
virtual functions in C++,
there is always sort of a Vtable
pointer at the beginning of your object.
Objective C has something analogous
that needs to be initialized.
And C++, you know,
wouldn't know what to do with that.
I believe this is my final
restriction type slide.
I mentioned earlier that you can embed
C++ classes within Objective C classes,
but there is a catch.
You may not do this if you
have any virtual functions.
Again, this is because you would
have a Vtable pointer,
and in this case the Objective
C runtime wouldn't know what
to do with the Vtable pointer.
So this really goes both ways.
If you have a non-virtual constructor,
like in the struct class 2 example there,
we will let it slide.
However,
we will give you a warning because
that constructor won't be called.
So if you're expecting to have
the class 2 member initialized,
that won't happen.
And the reason we allow this
is because in Objective C,
you can put C structs in like this.
And of course that's fine
because you don't expect any
initialization semantics in C.
Is this my final example?
I believe so.
So this is the most
important slide probably,
how you get your hands on this stuff.
We are really very close to
starting seeding this thing,
having people try it out.
And if you are interested in
being one of our early victims,
and I'm really joking.
It's actually quite stable at this point.
We've used it as a C++ compiler
on our system very successfully.
So I'm really proud of it.
Anyway, if you're interested in
becoming a seed partner with us,
please approach Godfrey,
our session manager,
at the end of our session
here after the Q&A.
And now I'll hand it back to
John for some closing thoughts.
Thanks, Zem.
I just want to say that we
brought Zem on in February,
and he started on this in March,
basically using the old crufty
2.72 Objective C++ implementation.
Crufty because of the 2.72 C++
implementation in GCC was pretty bad.
And he actually got this up and running,
and just last week we were able to
compile the full Finder code base,
which is all PowerPlant as well,
with this compiler.
So it's not only compiling
all of our Objective C++ code,
but it's also a real, honest-to-God,
C++ compiler.
So Zem did a great job,
and I think we should give
him a hand for agreeing this.
So all of you who are interested
in bringing your C++ applications,
your C++ Unix tools,
and putting a Cocoa front end on them,
this is your path to success.
This will get you there.
And it's a very nice thing.
I personally have written
a lot of Objective C++ code
using the old compiler,
and I'm really looking forward to
being able to use this new compiler.
It's going to be really great.
[Transcript missing]
So, just to wind it up,
GCC is our road tested
open compiler for Mac OS X.
You can go out and get the
sources today if you want them.
It works from the command line.
It's a usable command line tool.
It works even better
from Project Builder.
We have a lot of support in there that
is actually difficult to access from the
command line where we take advantage of
a lot of the things that the IDE provides
and really use the features in GCC.
And the big thing to keep in mind
is that Apple is fully committed
to GCC as our main line compiler.
We run all of Mac OS X through GCC.
Every binary that you bring up when
you install the Mac OS X GM has
been run through the GNU compiler.
It does everything,
all of our Objective C, C++, C,
and now it's going to be doing
all of our Objective C++ as well.
So, with that,
turn it back over to Gautri.
Thank you very much, John.
A big hand for the team.
I think they've done a fantastic job.
Some information resources, as usual.
Information pages for all the
Mac OS X tools are available
at the Apple Developer website
under the Tools area.
We also, for this scene,
because GCC is an open source project,
we wanted to give you the pointer for
open source at the Apple web pages.
And the GNU project web source as well,
since they're the baseline
for all the GNU stuff.
And another pointer also to
our mailing list main server.
We have several mailing lists that
are germane to the development tasks.
Project Builder Users is the one
that has been very heavily used.
Got over 500 subscribers now.
Cocoa Dev and Carbon Dev,
over a thousand, thank you Dave.
Cocoa Dev and Carbon Dev are also
getting populated very rapidly as well.
Roadmap for more tool sessions.
A very important session
this afternoon at 5:00.
Robert Bowditch in 7:05 will show
you how to use the performance
tools that we're supplying on disk.
This has tremendous benefit for everyone.
Tomorrow, 7:06 in the main hall at 9:00,
debugging on Mac OS X using GDB.
The Darwin Documentation Project and also
the feedback forum tomorrow afternoon
are also very good opportunities for
you to talk to the development team
and get more questions and answers.
With that, and especially for the
Objective C++ seeding,
this is my contact information on top.
I would ask, again,
as we put in the slide,
if you're looking to be a candidate
for as an Objective C++ seed site,
that's a mouthful,
please put that in the subject
line so that I can identify them
easily and manage the seed program.
My group, Technology Management,
does all the management of
seeding for Apple Computer.
The Mac OS X Tools Feedback Address
sends your email directly to the
key personnel in the development
teams in our tools groups.
It's a good way to get
feature enhancements,
ideas expressed directly to us.
And the URL at the bottom of the screen,
which reappears on the Q&A slide,
is a master page of all the
URLs organized by session for the show.
So if there's one URL that
you should write down,
you should write down the last
one because that will allow you
to get to all the URLs and all
the information resources that we
distribute throughout the entire show.